"Janamejaya said, "When the high-souled Kesava and Arjuna after slaying their enemies repaired to 
the assembly rooms, what conversation, O regenerate one, took place between them?' Vaisampayana 
said, "The son of Pritha (Arjuna), having recovered his own kingdom, joyously spent his time, 
without doing anything else, in the company of Krishna, his heart filled with delight, in that 
palace of celestial beauty. One day, those two listlessly proceeded to a particular part of the 
palace that looked, O king, like a veritable portion of Heaven. Themselves filled with delight, 
they were then surrounded by their relatives and attendents. Pandu's son, Arjuna, filled with joy 
in the company of Krishna, surveyed that delightful mansion, and then addressed his companion, 
saying, 'O--mighty-armed one, thy greatness became known to me upon the approach of the battle. O 
son of Devaki, thy form also, as the Lord of the universe, then became known to me! What thy holy 
self said unto me at that time, O Kesava, through affection, has all been forgotten by me, O chief 
of men, in consequence of the fickleness of my mind. Repeatedly, however, have I been curious on 
the subject of those truths. Thou again, O Madhava, wilt repair to Dwaraka soon.' Vaisampayana 
continued, 'Thus addressed by him, Krishna of mighty energy, that foremost of speakers, embraced 
Phalguna and replied unto him as follows. 'Vasudeva said, 'I made thee listen to truths that are 
regarded as mysteries. I imparted to thee truths that are eternal. Verily, I discoursed to thee on 
Religion in its true form and on all the eternal regions. It is exceedingly disagreeable to me to 
learn that thou didst not, from folly, receive what I imparted. The recollection of all that I 
told thee on that occasion will not come to me now. Without doubt, O son of Pandu, thou art 
destitute of faith and thy understanding is not good. It is impossible for me, O Dhananjaya, to 
repeat, in detail, all that I said on that occasion. That religion (about which I discoursed to 
thee then) is more than sufficient for understanding Brahma. I cannot discourse on it again in 
detail. I discoursed to thee on Supreme Brahma, having concentrated myself in Yoga. I shalt now, 
however, recite to thee an old history upon the same topic. O foremost of all persons, observant 
of duty, listen to everything I now say, so that, with an understanding adapted to my teaching, 
thou mayst succeed in attaining to the highest end. O chastiser of foes, on one occasion, a 
Brahmana came to us from the regions of Heaven. Of irresistible energy, he came from the regions 
of the Grandsire. He was duly reverenced by us. Listen. O son of Pritha, without yielding to 
scruples of any kind, to what he, O chief of Bharata's race, said, in answer to our enquiries, 
agreeably to heavenly forms.' The Brahmana said, That which thou askest me, O Krishna, connected 
with the religion of Moksha (Emancipation), led by thy compassion for all creatures (and not for 
thy own good),--that, indeed, which destroys all delusion, O thou that art possessed of supreme 
puissance 1 I shall now tell thee duly, O slayer of Madhu. Do thou listen with concentrated 
attention as I discourse to thee, O Madhava. A Brahmana of the name of Kasyapa, possessed of 
penances and the foremost of all persons conversant with duties, came to a certain other Brahmana 
who had become conversant with all the mysteries of religion. 2 Indeed, the latter had mastered 
all the knowledge which the scriptures teach respecting the departure and reappearance of beings 
and possessed that direct knowledge of all things which Yoga gives. He was well skilled in the 
truths of all topics relating to the world. He had mastered the truth about pleasure and pain. He 
knew the truth about birth and death, and understood the distinctions between merit and demerit. 
He was a beholder of the ends attained to by embodied creatures high and low in consequence of 
their acts. He lived like one emancipated from the world. Crowned with ascetic success and 
possessed of perfect tranquillity of soul, he had all his senses under complete control. He seemed 
to blaze with the resplendence of Brahma and was capable of going everywhere at will. He knew the 
science of disappearing at will from before the eyes of all. He used to rove in the company of 
invisible Siddhas and celestial musicians. He used to sit and converse with them on some spot 
retired from the bustle of humanity. He was as unattached to all things as the wind. Kasyapa 
having heard of him truly, desired to see him. Possessed of intelligence, that foremost of all 
Brahmanas, approached the sage. Himself possessed of penances, Kasyapa, moved by the desire of 
acquiring merit, fell, with a rapt heart, at the feet of the sage when he had seen all those 
wonderful attributes. Filled with wonder at the sight of those extraordinary accomplishments, 
Kasyapa began to wait upon that foremost of all Brahmanas, with the dutiful reverence of a 
disciple waiting upon his preceptor and succeeded in propitiating him. By his devotion, O scorcher 
of foes, rendering to hint the obedience due from a disciple to a preceptor, Kasyapa gratified 
that Brahmana who possessed all these accomplishments and was endued, besides, with scriptural 
learning and excellent conduct. Gratified with Kasyapa, that Brahmana one day addressed him 
cheerfully and spoke as follows, with an eye to the highest success. Listen to those words, O 
Janarddana, as I repeat them. "--'The ascetic crowned with success said,'--By diverse acts, O son, 
as also by the aid of merit, mortal creatures attain to diverse ends here and residence in Heaven. 
Nowhere is the highest happiness; nowhere can residence be eternal. There are repeated falls from 
the highest regions acquired with such sorrow. In consequence of my indulgence in sin, I had to 
attain to diverse miserable and inauspicious ends, filled as I was with lust and wrath, and 
deluded by cupidity. I have repeatedly undergone death and rebirth. I have eaten diverse kinds of 
food, I have sucked at diverse breasts. I have seen diverse kinds of mothers, and diverse fathers 
dissimilar to one another. Diverse kinds of happiness have been mine and diverse kinds of misery, 
O sinless one. On diverse occasions have I been separated from what was agreeable and united with 
what was disagreeable. Having earned wealth with great toil I have had to put up with its loss. 
Insults and excessive misery I have received from king and relatives. Mental and physical pain, of 
great severity, have been mine. Humiliations I have undergone, and death and immurement under 
circumstances of great severity. Falls into Hell have been mine, and great tortures in the domains 
of Yama. Decrepitude and diseases have repeatedly assailed me, and calamities, as frequent, in 
copious measure. In this world I have repeatedly undergone all those afflictions that flow from a 
perception of all pairs of opposites. After all this, one day, overwhelmed with sorrow, blank 
despair came upon me. I took refuge in the Formless. Afflicted as I was with great distress, I 
gave up the world with all its joys and sorrows. 1 Understanding then this path, I exercised 
myself in it in this world. Afterwards, through tranquillity of soul, I attained to this success 
that thou seest. I shall not have to come to this world again (after my departure hence). Verily, 
till I attain to absorption into eternal Brahman, till, in fact, the final dissolution of the 
universe, I shall look on those happy ends that will be mine, and on those beings that constitute 
this universe. 1 Having acquired this excellent success, I shall, after departing from this world, 
proceed, to what is above it (i.e., Satyaloka) and thence to what is higher (i.e., absorption into 
Brahman). Verily, I shall attain to the condition, which is unmanifest aspect of Brahman. Let no 
doubt be thine as regards this. O scorcher of foes, I shall not return to this world of mortal 
creatures. O thou of great wisdom, I have become gratified with thee. Tell me what I shall do for 
thee. The time has come for the accomplishment of that purpose for which thou hast come hither. 
Verily, I know that object for which thou hast sought me. I shall soon depart from this world. 
Hence it is that I have given thee this hint. O thou of great wisdom and experience, I have been 
highly gratified with thee for thy behaviour. Do thou question me. I shall discourse on what is 
beneficial to thee, agreeably to thy desire. I think thy intelligence is great. Indeed, I applaud 
it much, for it was with the aid of that intelligence that thou wert able to recognise me. Surely, 
O Kasyapa, thou art possessed of great intelligence.'"Vasudeva said, touching the feet of that 
sage, the Brahmana asked him some questions that were exceedingly difficult to answer. That 
foremost of all righteous persons then discoursed on those duties that were referred to. 'Kasyapa 
said, 'How does the body dissolve away, and how is another acquired? How does one become 
emancipated after passing through a repeated round of painful rebirths? Enjoying Prakriti for 
sometime, how does Jiva cast off the particular body (which Prakriti gives)? How does Jiva, freed 
from the body, attain to what is different from it (viz., Brahman)? How does a human being enjoy 
(and endure the fruits of) the good and bad acts done by him? Where do the acts exist of one that 
is devoid of body? 'The Brahmana said,--Thus urged by Kasyapa, the emancipated sage answered those 
questions one after another. Do thou listen to me, O scion of the Vrishi race, as I recite to thee 
the answers he made.' '--The Emancipated sage said, 'Upon the exhaustion of those acts capable of 
prolonging life and bringing on fame which are done in a particular body that Jiva assumes, the 
embodied Jiva, with the span of his life shortened, begins to do acts hostile to life and health. 
On the approach of destruction, his understanding turns away from the proper course. The man of 
uncleansed soul, after even a correct apprehension of his constitution and strength and of the 
season of both his own life and of the year, begins to eat at irregular intervals and to eat such 
food as is hostile to him. 1 At such a time he indulges in practices that are exceedingly harmful. 
He sometimes eats excessively and sometimes abstains altogether from food. He eats bad food or bad 
meat or takes bad drinks, or food that has been made up of ingredients incompatible with one 
another. He eats food that is heavy in excess of the measure that is beneficial, or before the 
food previously taken has been digested. He indulges in physical exercise and sexual pleasure in 
excess of the due measure, or through avidity for work, suppresses the urgings of his corporeal 
organism even when they become pronounced. Or, he takes food that is very juicy, or indulges in 
sleep during daytime. Food that is not properly digested, of itself excites the faults, when the 
time comes. 2 From such excitement of the faults in his body, he gets disease ending in death 
itself. Sometimes the person engages in perverse or unnatural acts like hanging (for bringing 
about his death). Through these causes the living body of the creature dissolves away. Understand 
correctly the manner as I declare it to thee. 3 Urged on by the Wind which becomes violent, the 
heat in the body, becoming excited and reaching every part of the body one after another, 
restrains all the (movements of the) vital breaths. Know truly that excited all over the body, the 
heat becomes very strong, and pierces every vital part where life may be said to reside. In 
consequence of this, Jiva, feeling great pain, quickly takes leave of its mortal casement. Know, O 
foremost of regenerate persons, that when the vital parts of the physical organism become thus 
afflicted, Jiva slips away from the body, overwhelmed with great pain. All living creatures are 
repeatedly afflicted with birth and death. It is seen, O chief of Brahmanas, that the pain which 
is felt by a person when casting off his bodies is like what is felt by him when first entering 
the womb or when issuing out of it. His joints become almost dislocated and he derives much 
distress from the waters (of the womb). 4 Urged on by (another) violent wind, the wind that is in 
the body becomes excited through cold, and dissolves away the union of matter (called the body) 
into its respective elements numbering five. 1 That wind which resides in the vital breaths called 
Prana and Apana occurring within this compound of the five primal elements, rushes upwards, from a 
situation of distress, leaving the embodied creature. It is even thus that the wind leaves the 
body. Then is seen breathlessness. The man then becomes destitute of heat, of breath, of beauty, 
and of consciousness. Deserted by Brahman (for Jiva is Brahman), the person is said to be dead. By 
those ducts through which he perceives all sensuous objects, the bearer of the body no longer 
perceives them. It is the eternal Jiva who creates in the body in those very duets the 
life-breaths that are generated by food. The elements gathered together become in certain parts 
firmly united. Know that those parts are called the vitals of the body. It is said so in the 
Sastras. When those vital parts are pierced, Jiva, rising up, enters the heart of the living 
creature and restrains the principle of animation without any delay. The creature then, though 
still endued with the principle of consciousness, fails to know anything. The vital parts being 
all overwhelmed, the knowledge of the living creature becomes overwhelmed by darkness. Jiva then, 
who has been deprived of everything upon which to stay, is then agitated by the wind. He then, 
deeply breathing a long and painful breath, goes out quickly, causing the inanimate body to 
tremble. Dissociated from the body, Jiva, however, is surrounded by his acts. He becomes equipped 
on every side with all his auspicious acts of merit and with all his sins. Brahmanas endued with 
knowledge and equipped with the certain conclusions of the scriptures, know him, from indications, 
as to whether he is possessed of merit or with its reverse. Even as men possessed of eyes behold 
the fire-fly appearing and disappearing amid darkness, men possessed of the eye of knowledge and 
crowned with success of penances, behold, with spiritual vision, Jiva as he leaves the body, as he 
is reborn, and as he enters the womb. It is seen that Jiva has three regions assigned to him 
eternally. This world where creatures dwell is called the field of action. Accomplishing acts good 
or bad, all embodied creatures attain to the fruits thereof. In consequence of their own acts, 
creatures acquire even here superior or inferior enjoyments. Doers of evil deeds here, in 
consequence of those acts of theirs, attain to Hell. This condition of sinking with head 
downwards, in which creatures are cooked, is one of great misery. It is such that a rescue 
therefrom is exceedingly difficult. Indeed; one should strive hard for saving oneself from this 
misery. Those regions where creatures dwell when they ascend from this world I shall now declare 
truly. Do thou listen to me with attention. By listening to what I say, thou shalt attain to 
firmness of understanding and a clear apprehension of (good and bad) acts. Know that even those 
are the regions of all creatures of righteous deeds, viz., the stellar worlds that shine in the 
firmament, the lunar disc, and the solar disc as well that shines in the universe in its own 
light. Upon the exhaustion, again, of their merits, they fall away from those regions repeatedly. 
There, in Heaven itself, is distinction of inferior, superior, and middling felicity. There, in 
Heaven itself, is discontent at sight of prosperity more blazing than one's own. Even these are 
the goals which I have mentioned in detail. I shall, after this, discourse to you on the 
attainment by Jiva of the condition of residence in the womb. Do thou hear me, with concentrated 
attention, O regenerate one, as I speak to thee!' "--The Brahmana said, 'The acts, good and bad, 
that a Jiva does are not subject to destruction. Upon attainment of body after body, those acts 
produce fruits corresponding with them. 1 As a fruit-bearing tree, when the season comes of 
productivity, yields a large quantity of fruit, similarly merit, achieved with a pure heart, 
yields a large crop (of felicity). After the same fashion, sin, done with a sinful heart, produces 
a large crop of misery. The Soul (or Jiva), placing the mind ahead, addresses himself to action. 
Hear then how Jiva, equipt with all his acts and overwhelmed with lust and wrath, enters the womb. 
The vital seed, mixed with blood, enters the womb of females and becomes the field (of Jiva), good 
or bad, born of (his) acts. In consequence of his subtlety and the condition of being unmanifest, 
Jiva does not become attached to anything even after attaining to a body. Therefore, he is called 
Eternal Brahman. 2 That (viz., Jiva or Brahman) is the seed of all creatures. It is in consequence 
of Him that living creatures live. That Jiva, entering all the limbs of the foetus part by part, 
accepting the attribute of mind, and residing within all the regions that belong to Prana, 
supports (life). In consequence of this, the foetus becoming endued with mind begins to move its 
limbs. 3 As liquified iron, poured (into a mould), takes the form of the mould, know that the 
entrance of Jiva into the foetus is even such. As fire, entering a mass of iron, heats it greatly, 
do thou know that the manifestation of Jiva in the foetus is such. As a lamp, burning in a room, 
discovers (all things within it), after the same manner mind discovers the different limbs of the 
body. 1 Whatever acts, good or bad, Jiva does in a former body, have certainly to be enjoyed or 
endured by him. By such enjoyment and endurance former acts are exhausted, and other acts, again, 
accumulate, till Jiva succeed in acquiring a knowledge of the duties included in that 
contemplation which leads to Emancipation. Regarding this, I shall tell thee those acts by which 
Jiva, O best of men, while coursing through a repeated round of re-births, becomes happy, Gifts, 
observances of austerity, Brahmacharyya, bearing Brahman according to the ordinances laid down, 
self-restraint, tranquillity, compassion for all creatures, restraint of passions, abstentions 
from cruelty as also from appropriating what belongs to others, refraining from doing even 
mentally all acts that are false and injurious to living creatures on the Earth, reverently 
serving mother and father, honouring deities and guests, worship of preceptors, pity, purity, 
constant restraint of all organs, and causing of all good acts, are said to constitute the conduct 
of the good. From observance of such conduct, arises Righteousness which protects all creatures 
eternally. Such conduct one would always behold among persons that are good. Verily, such conduct 
resides there eternally. That course of practices to which persons of tranquil souls adhere 
indicates Righteousness. Among them is thrown that course of practices which constitutes eternal 
Righteousness. He who would betake himself to that Righteousness would never have to attain to a 
miserable end. It is by the conduct of the good that the world is restrained in the paths of 
Righteousness when it falls away. He that is a Yogin is Emancipated, and is, therefore, 
distinguished above these (viz., the good). 2 Deliverance from the world takes place, after a long 
time, of one who acts righteously and well on every occasion as he should. A living creature thus 
always meets with the acts done by him in a former life. All these acts constitute the cause in 
consequence of which he comes into this world in a state different from his true form. 3 There is 
a doubt in the world as regards the question. By what was the acceptance (by Jiva) of a body first 
determined. The Grandsire of all the worlds, viz., Brahma having first formed a body of his own, 
then created the three worlds, in their entirety, of mobile and immobile creatures. Having first 
himself assumed a body, he then created Pradhana. That Pradhana is the material cause of all 
embodied creatures, by whom is all this covered and whom all came to know as the highest. This 
that is seen is said to be destructible; while the other is immortal and indestructible. This that 
(is seen) is said to be Kshara (the destructible); that, however, which is Para (the other) is the 
Immortal, (as also) Akshara (the Indestructible). Of each Purusha taken distributively, the whole 
is duality among these three. 4 Seen first (to appear in an embodied form) [paragraph continues] 
Prajapati (then) created all the primal elements and all immobile creatures. Even this is the 
ancient audition. Of that (acceptance of body), the Grandsire ordained a limit in respect of time, 
and migrations among diverse creatures and return or rebirth. All that I say is proper and 
correct, like to what a person who is endued with intelligence and who has seen his soul, would 
say on this topic of previous births. 1 That person who looks upon pleasure and pain as 
inconstant, which, indeed, is the correct view, who regards the body as an unholy conglomeration, 
and destruction as ordained in action, and who remembers that what little of pleasure there is, is 
really all pain, will succeed in crossing this terrible ocean of worldly migration that is so 
difficult to cross. Though assailed by decrepitude and death and disease, he that understands 
Pradhana beholds with all equal eye that Consciousness which dwells in all beings endued with 
consciousness. Seeking the supreme seat, he then becomes utterly indifferent to all (other) 
things. O best of men, I shall now impart instruction to thee, agreeably to truth, concerning 
this. Do thou, O learned Brahmana, understand in completeness that which constitutes the excellent 
knowledge, as I declare it, of that indestructible seat.--'" "--The Brahmana said, 'He who becomes 
absorbed in the one receptacle (of all things), freeing himself from even the thought of his own 
identity with all things,--indeed, ceasing to think of even his own existence,--gradually casting 
off one after another, will succeed in crossing his bonds. 2 That man who is the friend of all, 
who endures all, who is attached to tranquillity, who has conquered all his senses, who is 
divested of fear and wrath, and who is of restrained soul. succeeds in emancipating himself. He 
who behaves towards all creatures as towards himself, who is restrained, pure, free from vanity 
and divested of egoism is regarded as emancipated from everything. He also is emancipated who 
looks with an equal eye upon life and death, pleasure and pain, gain and loss, agreeable and 
disagreeable. He is in every way emancipated who does not covet what belongs to others, who never 
disregards any body, who transcends all pairs of opposites, and whose soul is free from 
attachment. He is emancipated who has no enemy, no kinsman, and no child, who has cast off 
religion, wealth, and pleasure, and who is freed from desire or cupidity. He becomes emancipated 
who acquires neither merit nor demerit, who casts off the merits and demerits accumulated in 
previous births, who wastes the elements of his body for attaining to a tranquillised soul, and 
who transcends all pairs of opposites. He who abstains from all acts, who is free from desire or 
cupidity, who looks upon the universe as unenduring or as like an Aswattha tree, ever endued with 
birth, death and decrepitude, whose understanding is fixed on renunciation, and whose eyes are 
always directed towards his own faults, soon succeeds in emancipating himself from the bonds that 
bind him. 1 He that sees his soul void of smell, of taste and touch, of sound, of belongings, of 
vision, and unknowable, becomes emancipated. 2 He who sees his soul devoid of the attributes of 
the five elements to be without form and cause, to be really destitute of attributes though 
enjoying them, becomes emancipated. 3 Abandoning, with the aid of the understanding, all purposes 
relating to body and mind, one gradually attains to cessation of separate existence, like a fire 
unfed with fuel. 4 One who is freed from all impressions, who transcends all pairs of opposites, 
who is destitute of all belongings, and who uses all his senses under the guidance of penances, 
becomes emancipated. 5 Having become freed from all impressions, one then attains to Brahma which 
is Eternal and supreme, and tranquil, and stable, and enduring, and indestructible. After this I 
shall declare the science of Yoga to which there is nothing superior, and how Yogins, by 
concentration, behold the perfect soul. 6 I shall declare the instructions regarding it duly. Do 
thou learn from me those doors by which directing the soul within the body one beholds that which 
is without beginning and end. 7 Withdrawing the senses from their objects, one should fix the mind 
upon the soul; having previously undergone the severest austerities, one should practise that 
concentration of mind which leads to [paragraph continues] Emancipation. 1 Observant of penances 
and always practising concentration of mind, the learned Brahmana, endued with intelligence, 
should observe the precepts of the science of Yoga, beholding the soul in the body. If the good 
man succeeds in concentrating the mind on the soul, he then, habituated to exclusive meditation, 
beholds the Supreme soul in his own soul. Self-restrained, and always concentrated, and with all 
his senses completely conquered, the man of cleansed soul, in consequence of such complete 
concentration of mind, succeeds in beholding the soul by the soul. As a person beholding some 
unseen individual in a dream recognises him, saying,--This is he,--when he sees him after waking, 
after the same manner the good man having seen the Supreme Soul in the deep contemplation of 
Samadhi recognises it upon waking from Samadhi. 2 As one beholds the fibrous pith after extracting 
it from a blade of the Saccharum Munja, even so the Yogin beholds the soul, extracting it from the 
body. The body has been called the Saccharum Munja, and the fibrous pith is said to stand for the 
soul. This is the excellent illustration propounded by persons conversant with Yoga. When the 
bearer of a body adequately beholds the soul in Yoga, he then has no one that is master over him, 
for he then becomes the lord of the three worlds. 3 He succeeds in assuming diverse bodies 
according as he wishes. Turning away decrepitude and death, he neither grieves nor exults. The 
self-restrained man, concentrated in Yoga, can create (for himself) the godship of the very gods. 
Casting off his transient body he attains to immutable Brahma. 4 No fear springs up in him at even 
the sight of all creatures falling victims to destruction (before his eyes). When all creatures 
are afflicted,--he can never be afflicted by any one. Devoid of desire and possessed of a tranquil 
mind, the person in Yoga is never shaken by pain and sorrow and fear, the terrible effects that 
flow from attachment and affection. Weapons never pierce him; death does not exist for him. 
Nowhere in the world can be seen any one that is happier than he. Having adequately concentrated 
his soul, he lives steadily on himself. Turning off decrepitude and pain and pleasure, he sleeps 
in comfort. Casting off this human body he attains to (other) forms according to his pleasure. 
While one is enjoying the sovereignty that Yoga bestows, one should never fall away from devotion 
to Yoga. 5 When one, after adequate devotion to Yoga, beholds the Soul in oneself, one then ceases 
to have any regard for even him of a hundred sacrifices (Indra). 1 Hear now how one, habituating 
oneself to exclusive meditation, succeeds in attaining to Yoga. Thinking of that point of the 
compass which has the Sun behind it, the mind should be fixed, not outside, but in the interior of 
that mansion in which one may happen to live. Residing within that mansion, the mind should then, 
with all its outward and inward (operations), behold in that particular room in which one may 
stay. At that time when, having deeply meditated, one beholds the All (viz., Brahman, the Soul of 
the universe), there is then nothing external to Brahman where the mind may dwell. Restraining all 
the senses in a forest that is free from noise and that is uninhabited, with mind fixed thereon, 
one should meditate on the All (or universal Brahman) both outside and inside one's body. One 
should meditate on the teeth, the palate, the tongue, the throat, the neck likewise; one should 
also meditate on the heart and the ligatures of the heart! "The Brahmana continued, 'Thus 
addressed by me, that intelligent disciple, O slayer of Madhu, once more asked me about this 
religion of Emancipation that is so difficult to explain. How does this food that is eaten from 
time to time become digested in the stomach? How does it become transformed into juice? How, 
again, into blood? How does it nourish the flesh, the marrow, the sinews, the bones? How do all 
these limbs of embodied creatures grow? How does the strength grow of the growing man? How occurs 
the escape of all such elements as are not nutritive, and of all impurities separately? How does 
this one inhale and again, exhale? Staying upon what particular part does the Soul dwell in the 
body? How does Jiva, exerting himself, bear the body? Of what colour and of what kind is the body 
in which he dwells again (leaving a particular body)? O holy one, it behoveth thee to tell me all 
this accurately, O sinless one,--even thus was I interrogated by that learned Brahmana, O Madhava. 
I replied unto him, O thou of mighty arms, after the manner I myself had heard, O chastiser of all 
foes. As one placing some precious object in one's store-room should keep one's mind on it, so, 
placing the mind within one's own body, one should then, restraining all the senses, seek after 
the Soul, avoiding all heedlessness. One would, becoming always assiduous in this way and 
gratified with one's own self, within a very short time attain to that Brahma by beholding which 
one would become conversant with Pradhana. 1 He is not capable of being seized by the eye; nor 
even by all the senses. 2 It is only with the lamp of the mind that great Soul can be seen. He has 
hands and feet on all sides; he has ears on all sides; he dwells, pervading all things in the 
world. 3 Jiva beholds the Soul as extracted from the body (like the stalk from a blade of 
Saccharum Munja, when knowledge comes). Then casting off Brahma as invested with form, by holding 
the mind in the body, he beholds Brahma as freed from all attributes. 4 He sees the Soul with his 
mind, smiling as it were at the time. Depending upon that Brahma, he then attains to Emancipation 
in me. 5 O foremost of regenerate ones, all this mystery has now been declared by me. I ask thy 
permission, for I shall leave this spot. Do thou (also) go withersoever thou pleasest. Thus 
addressed by me, O Krishna, on that occasion, that disciple of mine, endued with austere penances, 
that Brahmana of rigid vows, went away according to his pleasure. "Vasudeva continued, 'That best 
of Brahmanas, O son of Pritha, having said these words unto me, on that occasion, properly 
relating to the religion of Emancipation, disappeared then and there. Has this discourse been 
heard by thee, O son of Pritha, with mind directed solely towards it? Even this was what thou 
didst hear on that occasion while thou wert on thy car. It is my opinion, O son of Pritha, that 
this is difficult of being comprehended by one whose understanding is confused, or who has 
acquired no wisdom by study, or who eats food incompatible with his body, or whose Soul is not 
purified. 6 O chief of Bharata's race, this is a great mystery among the deities that has been 
declared (to thee). At no time or place, O son of Pritha, has this been heard by man in this 
world. O sinless one, no other man than thyself is deserving of hearing it. It is not, at this 
time, capable of being easily understood by one whose inner soul is confused. The world of the 
deities is filled, O son of Kunti, with those who follow the religion of actions. The cessation of 
the mortal form (by practising the religion of inaction) is not agreeable to the deities. 1 That 
goal, O son of Pritha, is the highest which is constituted by eternal Brahman where one, casting 
off the body, attains to immortality and becomes always happy. By adhering to this religion, even 
they who axe of sinful birth, such as women and Vaisyas and Sudras, attain to the highest goal. 
What need be said then, O son of Pritha, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas possessed of great learning, 
always devoted to the duties of their own orders and who are intent on (the acquisition of) the 
region of Brahma? This has been laid down with the reasons (on which it rests); and also the means 
for its acquisition; and its complete attainment and fruit, viz., Emancipation and the 
ascertainment of the truth regarding pain. O chief of Bharata's race, there is nothing else that 
is fraught with happiness greater than this. That mortal, O son of Pandu, who, endued with 
intelligence, and faith, and prowess, renounces as unsubstantial what is regarded as substantial 
by the world, succeeds within a short time in obtaining the Supreme by these means. This is all 
that is to be said,--there is nothing else that is higher than this. Yoga takes place in his case, 
O son of Pritha, who devotes himself to its constant practice for a period of six months.'"